# Generating-NBA-Rookie-Comparisons
Originally, I wanted to build out this tool for draft prospects, to make it easier to develop 'comps' for players, seeing as 'comps' are the backbone of most NBA pre-draft content these days. With a lot of the combine data and college advanced stat data being inaccessible or sparse, I pivoted to using rookie season advanced stats and a subset of available NBA Draft Combine stats to create a proof-of-concept model. Hence, this repository here.

The streamlit app hosting the UI to interact with the model can be found at nbarookiecomps.streamlit.app. If you download 'rookie_train_pre2023.csv', 'rookie_test_2023on.csv', and 'rookie_comps_app.py', along with importing the required packages (streamlit, pandas, numpy, torch, sklearn), you can also type 'streamlit run rookie_comps_app.py' in the Terminal on your IDE and use the app. The app allows you to select from a list of 2023 and 2024 draft class NBA rookies with available data, and find out their 10 most similar rookie seasons from 2000 to 2023. Since a model like this has to ground truth to judge accuracy, no one can say for sure that this model is generating 'correct' responses. Rather, the goal is to develop a more pointed set of questions. For example, Rob Dillingham's closest comparison is former 53rd overall pick Kenny Satterfield. This should sound some alarms, but also force a deeper look into Satterfield's career trajectory and how Dillingham may follow or deviate from that.

The 30 features are as follows, with some advanced stats being scaled to that season's league average: Age, G, GS, MP, PER, TS%, 3PAr, FTr, ORB%, DRB%, TRB%, AST%, STL%, BLK%, TOV%, USG%, OWS, DWS, WS, WS/48, OBPM, DBPM, BPM, VORP, HGT, WGT, BMI, WNGSPN, STNDRCH, BAR. The advanced stats data was scaped from Basketball Reference, and the NBA Draft Combine data was pulled from Kaggle. The process of building out the final dataset can be seen in the Jupyter Notebook files included in this repository. This process did come with caveats. Since not all players took part in the NBA Draft Combine and/or did not take part in every drill, not all rookies to ever touch an NBA floor from 2000 to 2025 are included, and only a subset of these overall NBA Draft Combine measurements could be included. Therefore, comparisons are being made to a somewhat limited set of players.

The model itself begins with an autoencoder with a 3-layer feedforward neural net. I chose an autoencoder to handle dimensionality reduction, lowering the data to 8 dimensions from 30, while discovering any non-linear patterns that may be present in the data. This felt crucial to gaining good insights into highly interrelated variables. The output was fed into a K-Nearest Neighbors model, which was used to determine similarity score (using Euclidian distance). 

Future work would include testing out a few other possibilities for the autoencoder, and using PCA as a benchmark to see fi the oerthogonality constraint doesn't impact the comparisons. I would also like to pull together enough data to create a proper draft prospect model, as I see the value of a tool like this in making better draft selections.

